# Teaching Statement
Some of the most profound changes that we experience, may also be completely unnoticeable by us. That's actually a common thing in education; when students experience a paradigm shift, they often don't realize it. Take calculus for example. First you don't understand it to such a degree that you are not really aware of your lack of understanding. And then at some point it becomes a second nature to you, and you can no longer relate to your former self; you simply can't remember how it felt not to know calculus. The state of not-knowing becomes unthinkable. Or maybe learning a language is a better metaphor for you. Sometimes we are lucky to collect a couple of funny anecdotes on the way, about how we misunderstood something, or used a word incorrectly, but besides that, it's really hard to notice a change from within. It is too profound. (That's why some professors like to give the final exam on the first day of the course: to provide a "before" and "after" comparison, and make students aware of their own learning).

I think something similar happened to my teaching in last 7 years, during my work at Bard. There is a paper trail of syllabi of course, and I will write a bit about some changes that I can spot there, but mostly, I now feel as if teaching well were obvious and common sense; as if I always knew how to do it, which is of course completely untrue. (This effect has a parallel in science as well. Profound discoveries are often really underwhelming in the hindsight. Take heliocentric theory, or something like predator-prey equations; at this point them almost feel like duh, of course, these things are obvious, aren't they? Except they really weren't)

If I write that to teach well you should really only do one thing: always challenge the reasons behind every decision (picking a topic, an assignment, a grading system); challenge the reasons, the rationale, track your logic down to your existential goals, down to why you work in education at all; - if I write it, is it profound? Or is it boring and obvious? I can no longer tell! It seems obvious to me, because it is such a common sense thing to do: why do we work with a certain text, rather than some other one; why do we read instead of going outside; - it's only logical that, as an instructor, you would always pick what is more useful (or more fun, if that's your goal, or something that's easier, as it frees time and mental capacity to do something else). And it's only logical that if we engage in the activity of asking "Why do I do that?" honestly, at some point you reach the bottom of it; the question of "Why am I working here?" or maybe even "Why am I alive"? So perhaps it's not profound at all. But alas that's practically all I need to say about teaching, isn't it? Everything else is just a summary of evidence-based advice, tips and tricks that worked well for me in the past, and idiosyncratic personal opinions about what's  most important in life.

So instead of writing a systematic teaching statement, I will probably comment on several aspects of my teaching at Bard. I'll write about grading, as I feel that grading systems are a litmus test of goal-oriented course design. I will write about my favorite assignment ever, as it is a backbone of every course I ever taught. And I'll write about teaching evaluations, as I think it presents an important limitation to how we think about teaching.  I hope together these three pieces will help to understand my evolution as an educator!